####The Theory of Everything

####Uniformity And Uniqueness Of The Universe

####Race

####There is No Reality in the Quantum World

####Urvogel

####We'll Never Hit Barriers To Scientific Understanding

####Life Evolves Via A Shared Genetic Toolkit
Genes and their interaction networks determine the phenotype of an organism—what it looks like and how it behaves. One of the biggest problems in modern evolutionary biology is understanding the relationship between genes and phenotypes. The prevailing theory is that all animals are built from essentially the same set of regulatory genes—a genetic toolkit, and that phenotypic variation within and between species arises simply by using shared genes differently. Scientists are now generating a vast amount of genomic data from an eclectic mix of organisms. These data are telling us to put to bed the idea that all life is underlain by a common toolkit of conserved genes. Instead, we need to turn our attention to the role of genomic novelty in the evolution of phenotypic diversity and innovation.

####Big Effects Have Big Explanations

####Knowing is Half the Battle
The lesson of much contemporary research in judgment and decision-making is that knowledge— at least in the form of our consciously accessible representation of a situation—is rarely the central factor controlling our behavior. The real power of online behavioral control comes not from knowledge, but from things like situation selection, habit formation, and emotion regulation. This is a lesson that therapy has taken to heart, but one that "pure science" continues to neglect.

####Information Overload
The Internet scholar Clay Shirky puts it well: "There's no such thing as information overload. There's only filter failure." If your filters are bad there is always too much to attend to, and never enough time. These aren't trends powered by technology. They are conditions of life.

####The Universe Began In A State Of Extraodinarily Low Entropy

####Heights And Lengths And Areas Of Rectangles

####Moore's Law
First and foremost Moore's Law has allowed to perceive the development of the digital era as a linear narrative. The simple curve of progression is the digital equivalent of the ancient wheat and chessboard problem (with a potentially infinite chessboard). Like the Persian inventor of the game of chess who demanded from the king a geometric progression of grains all across the board, digital technology seems to develop exponentially. This model ignores the parallel nature of digital progress, which encompasses not only technological or economic development, but scientific, social and political change. Changes that can rarely be quantified.

####People Are Sheep

####Large Randomized Controlled Trials
It is a commonly held but erroneous belief that a larger study is always more rigorous or definitive than a smaller one, and a randomized controlled trial is always the gold standard . However, there is a growing awareness that size does not always matter and a randomized controlled trial may introduce its own biases. We need more creative experimental designs.

####Universal Grammar
The world's languages differ to the point of inscrutability. Knowing the English word "duck" doesn't help you guess the French "canard" or Japanese "ahiru." But there are commonalities hidden beneath the superficial differences. For instance, human languages tend to have parts of speech (like nouns and verbs). They tend to have ways to embed propositions in other ones. ("John knows that Mary thinks that Paul embeds propositions in other ones.") And so on. But why?

An influential and appealing explanation is known as <em>Universal Grammar</em>: core commonalities across languages exist because they are part of our genetic endowment. On this view, humans are born with an innate predisposition to develop languages with very specific properties. Infants expect to learn a language that has nouns and verbs, that has sentences with embedded propositions, and so on.

This could explain not only why languages are similar but also what it is to be uniquely human and indeed how children acquire their native language. It may also seem intuitively plausible, especially to people who speak several languages: If English (and Spanish… and French!) have nouns and verbs, why wouldn't every language? To date, Universal Grammar remains one of the most visible products of the field of Linguistics—the one minimally counterintuitive bit that former students often retain from an introductory Linguistics class.

####M-theory / String Theory is the Only Game in Town

####The Uncertainty Principle

####Big Data

####*The* Universe

####The Illusion of Scientific Progress

####Mental Illness is Nothing But Brain Illness

####Habitable Zone
The habitable zone defines those distances from a star where a planet similar to Earth would have the surface temperatures for water to be liquid. In the Solar System this zone stretches from in-between the orbits of Venus and Earth out to Mars. Its boundaries are approximate as they are applied to different planetary systems and sometimes the concept is used more broadly, e.g., to galaxies. The habitable zone concept has a venerable history in the search for alien life beyond Earth and most recently it contributed to the spectacular success of the NASA Kepler exoplanet-hunting mission. However, in the post-Kepler era it is a scientific concept that is ready for retirement.

####The Altruism Hierarchy
Human beings are the unequivocal world champions of niceness. We act kindly not only towards people who belong to our own social groups or can reciprocate our generosity, but also towards strangers thousands of miles away who will never know we helped them. All around the world, people sacrifice their resources, well being, and even their lives in the service of others.

For behavioral scientists, the great and terrible thing about altruism—behavior that helps others at a cost to the helper—is its inherent contradictions. Prosocial behaviors appear to contradict economic and evolutionary axioms about how humans should behave: selfishly, nasty and brutish, red in tooth and claw, or whichever catchphrase you prefer. After all, how could organisms that sacrifice for others survive, and why would nature endow us with such self-defeating tendencies?

####Nature = Objects

####Rational Actor Models: The Competence Corollary

####Intelligence As a Property

####Animal Mindlessness

####Altruism
The concept of altruism is ready for retirement.

What needs to go away is the basic idea behind the concept of altruism: the idea that there is a conflict of interest between helping yourself and helping others.

Behavioral science and neurobiology has shown how intimately we are bound: Phenomena like mimicry, emotional contagion, empathy, sympathy, compassion and prosocial behavior are evident in humans and animals. We are influenced by the well-being of others in more ways than we normally care to think of. Therefore a simple rules applies: <em>Everyone feels better when you are well. You feel better when everyone is well.</em>

####Moral Blank State-ism
There is a persistent belief in our society that morality is acquired slowly and at considerable effort after birth. That is, it is common to view young children as moral "blank slates," beginning life with no real moral leanings of any kind. On this viewpoint, children first encounter the moral world in person, via their own experiences and observations. Children then actively (or passively, but fewer scholars believe this today) combine such experiences and observations with advances in impulse control, perspective taking, and complex reasoning, allowing them to become more and more "moral" over time.

####Associationism

####Entropy
Entropy, the measure of the degree of disorder in a system, has held a lofty place in physics, being part of a Law no less (not just a theory). The Second Law of Thermodynamics says that in any closed system entropy always increases with time. Unless work is done to prevent it, a closed system will eventually reach maximum entropy and a state of thermal equilibrium. Max Planck believed that entropy (along with energy) was the most important property of physical systems. Sir Arthur Eddington is quoted as saying that "The law that entropy increases—the second law of thermodynamics—holds, I think, the supreme position among the laws of Nature." But as a young physics student in college I must admit I never understood their excitement (and I was not the only student to be unimpressed). The Second Law seemed of minor importance compared to the First Law of Thermodynamics, the conservation of energy—energy could be transformed into different forms, but it was always conserved. The First Law had beautiful partial differential equations (as did all the conservation equations of physics) whose solutions accurately described and predicted so much of the world, and literally changed all our lives. The Second Law was not a conservation equation and had no beautiful partial differential equations. It wasn't even an equality. Has the idea of entropy and the Second Law had any major affect on science and engineering or changed the world?

####Scientific Knowledge Should Be Structured as "Literature"

####Only "Scientists" Can Do Science

####Natural Selection is the Only Engine of Evolution
These findings fit in a relatively new field of study called epigenetics. Epigenetic control of gene expression contributes to cells in a single organism (which share the same DNA sequence) developing differently into e.g. heart cells or neurons. But the last decade has shown actual evidence–and possible mechanisms–for how the environment and the organism's behavior in it might cause heritable changes in gene expression (with no change in the DNA sequence) that are passed onto offspring. In recent years, we have seen evidence of epigenetic inheritance across a wide range of morphological, metabolic, and even behavioral traits.

The intergenerational transmission of acquired traits is making a comeback as a potential mechanism of evolution. It also opens up the interesting possibility that better diet, exercise, and education which we thought couldn't affect the next generation–except with luck through good example–actually could.

####Sadness is Always Bad, Happiness is Always Good
Let's start with negative emotions. Early hedonic theories defined well-being, in part, as the relative absence of negative emotion. Empirically based treatments like cognitive-behavioral therapy also focus heavily on the reduction of negative feelings and moods as part of enhancing well-being. Yet a strong body of scientific work suggests that negative emotions are essential to our psychological well-being. Here are 3 examples. First, from an evolutionary perspective, negative emotions aid in our survival—they provide important clues to threats or problems that need our attention (such as an unhealthy relationship or dangerous situation). Second, negative emotions help us focus: they facilitate more detailed and analytic thinking, reduce stereotypic thinking, enhance eyewitness memory, and promote persistence on challenging cognitive tasks. Third, attempting to thwart or suppress negative emotions—rather than accept and appreciate them—paradoxically backfires and increases feelings of distress and intensifies clinical symptoms of substance abuse, overeating, and even suicidal ideation. Counter to these hedonic theories of well-being, negative emotions are hence not inherently bad for us. Moreover, the relative absence of them predicts poorer psychological adjustment.

####Crime is Only About The Actions Of Individuals

####A Science of Language Should Be Concerned Only With 'Competence' 

####The Way We Produce And Advance Science

####Opposites Can’t Both Be Right

####Some Questions Are Just Too Hard For Young Scientists To Tackle

####"Science"

####Radical Behaviorism

####Statistical Independence
The world is massively interconnected through causal chains. Gravity alone causally connects all objects with mass. The world is even more massively correlated with itself. It is a truism that statistical correlation does not imply causality. But it is a mathematical fact that statistical independence implies no correlation at all. None. Yet events routinely correlate with one another. The whole focus of most big-data algorithms is to uncover just such correlations in ever larger data sets.

####Bias is Always Bad
Being biased seems like a bad thing. Intuitively, rationality and objectivity are equated—when faced with a difficult question, it seems like a rational agent shouldn't have a predisposition to favor one answer over another. If a new algorithm designed to find objects in images or interpret natural language is described as being biased, it sounds like a poor algorithm. And when psychology experiments show that people are systematically biased in the judgments they form and the decisions they make, we begin to question human rationality.

But bias isn't always bad. In fact, for certain kinds of questions, the only way to produce better answers is to be biased.

Many of the most challenging problems that humans solve are known as inductive problems—problems where the right answer cannot be definitively identified based on the available evidence. Finding objects in images and interpreting natural language are two classic examples. An image is just a two-dimensional array of pixels—a set of numbers indicating whether locations are light or dark, green or blue. An object is a three-dimensional form, and many different combinations of three-dimensional forms can result in the same pattern of numbers in a set of pixels. Seeing a particular pattern of numbers doesn't tell us which of these possible three-dimensional forms are present: we have to weigh the available evidence and make a guess. Likewise, extracting the words from the raw sound pattern of human speech requires making an informed guess about the particular sentence a person might have uttered.

The only way to solve inductive problems well is to be biased. Because the available evidence isn't enough to determine the right answer, you need to have predispositions that are independent of that evidence. And how well you solve the problem—how often your guesses are correct—depends on having biases that reflect how likely different answers are.

####Aesthetic Motivation
The standard model of particle physics has aesthetic shortcomings that leave us with questions: Why so many free parameters? Why not an elegant, single fundamental force to account for all forces? Why three generations of quarks and leptons? Now that we have a mechanism for how fundamental particles acquire mass, why do they have those particular couplings to the Higgs field, covering such a huge range of masses? Why the even more extreme range of strengths of the fundamental forces? The common potential danger with each of these questions is the answer, "That's just the way it is."

####"Our" Intuitions

####Left-Brain/Right-Brain
Most people will have heard about the left-brain/right-brain idea. Maybe they have been told they're too 'left-brained' or want to be more 'right-brained'. The idea has made it into everyday parlance, has infiltrated schools everywhere, sells a lot of self-help books, and has even been used as the basis of scientific theories, for example with regards to gender differences in the brain. Yet it is an idea that makes no physiological sense.

Scientific lingo about how the two sides of the brain—the hemispheres—function has permeated mainstream culture, but the research is often wildly over-interpreted. The notion that the two hemispheres of the brain are involved in different 'modes of thinking' and that one hemisphere dominates over the other has become widespread, in particular in schools and the workplace. There are numerous websites where you can find out whether you are left-brained or right-brained and that offer to teach you how to change this.

####Evolution is True

####Long-Term Memory Is Immutable
For over a century psychological theory held that once memories are consolidated from a short-term into long-term form, they remain stable and unchanging. Whether certain long-term memories are very slowly forgotten or are always present but cannot be retrieved was a matter of debate.

Two recent lines of evidence have relegated this dominant theory of long-term memory ready for retirement. First is the discovery of reconsolidation. When memories are recalled, they undergo a brief period in which they are once again susceptible to disruption by many of the same biochemical inhibitors that affect the initial conversion of short- into long-term memory. This means that long-term memories are not immutable, but can be converted into short-term memory, and then reconverted back into long-term memory. If this reconversion doesn't happen, the specific long-term memory is effectively disrupted.

####The Rocket Scientist

####Continuity of Time
The concept of continuity of time is also hidden in another famous quotation ín psychology; William James writes in <em>Principles of Psychology</em> when he refers to the present: "In short, the practically cognized present is no knife-edge, but a saddle-back, with a certain breadth of its own on which we sit perched, and from which we look into two directions into time. The unit of composition of our perception of time is a duration, with a bow and a stern, as it were—a rearward—and forward-looking end...We seem to feel the interval of time as a whole, with its two ends embedded in it." Here we are confronted with the idea of a traveling moment, i.e. a temporal interval of finite duration is moving gradually through physical time (and not jumping), again assuming continuity of time. But is it really true and can it be used to understand neural and cognitive processes?

####Simple Answers
More precisely, the notion that there are simple answers to complex problems. The universe is complicated. Whether you are interested in the functioning of a cell, the ecosystem in Amazonia, the climate of the Earth or the solar dynamo, almost all of the systems and their impacts on our lives are complex and multi-faceted. It is natural for us to ask simple questions about these systems, and many of our greatest insights have come from the profound examination of such simple questions. However, the answers that have come back are never as simple. The answer in the real world is never "42".

####The Self
We know that the self is constructed because it can be so easily deconstructed through damage, disease and drugs. It must be an emergent property of a parallel system processing input, output and internal representations. It is an illusion because it feels so real, but that experience is not what it seems. The same is true for free will. Although we can experience the mental anguish of making a decision, our free will cannot be some kind of King Solomon in our mind weighing up the pros and cons as this would present the problem of logical infinite regress (who is inside their head and so on?). The choices and decisions we make are based on situations that impose on us. We do not have the free will to choose the experiences that have shaped our decisions.</p>
<p>Should we really care about the self? After all, trying to live without the self is challenging and not how we think. By experiencing, evoking and talking about the self, we are conveniently addressing a phenomenology that we can all relate to. Defaulting to the self in explanations of human behavior enables us to draw an abrupt stop in the chain of causality when trying to understand thoughts and actions. How notable that we do this all so easily when talking about humans but as soon as we apply the same approach to animals, one gets accused of anthropomorphism!

####Beauty is in the Eyes of the Beholder
The theory that 'beauty is in the eyes of the beholder' in the sense of being superficial, arbitrary, and infinitely culturally variable can safely be discarded. I regard it as one of the 'great myths' perpetrated by social scientists in the 20<sup>th</sup> century. Its scientific replacement—that beauty is 'in the adaptations of the beholder' as anthropologist Donald Symons phrases it—continues to be disturbing to some. It violates some of our most cherished beliefs and values. But then so did the notion that the earth was not flat or the center of the universe.

####Individuality

####Spacetime

####Markets Are Bad; Markets Are Good

####The Illusion of Certainty
Scientists sometimes resist new ideas and hang on to old ones longer than they should, but the real problem is the failure of the public to understand that the possibility of correction or disproof is a strength and not a weakness. We live in an era when it is increasingly important that the voting public be able to evaluate scientific claims and be able to make analogies between different kinds of phenomena, but this can be a major source of error. The process by which scientific knowledge is refined is largely invisible to the public. The truth-value of scientific knowledge is dependent upon its openness to correction, yet we all carry around ideas that science has long since revised—and are disconcerted when asked to abandon them. Surprise: You will not necessarily drown if you go swimming after lunch.

####Stationarity
Stationarity—the assumption that natural-world phenomena fluctuate with a fixed envelope of statistical uncertainty that doesn't change over time—is a widely applied scientific concept that is ready to be retired.

It had a good run. For more than a century, stationarity has been used to inform countless decisions aimed at the public good. It guides the planning and building codes for places susceptible to wildfires, floods, earthquakes, and hurricanes. It is used to determine how and where homes may be built, the structural strength of bridges, and how much premium people should pay for their homeowner's insurance policies. Crop yields are forecasted and, in the developed world, insured against catastrophic failures. And as more weather stations and river level gages are built and accumulate ever-longer data records, our abilities to make such calculations get better. This saves lives and a great deal of money.

####String Theory
In his <em>Scientific Autobiography</em>, Max Planck recalls that he was unable to persuade the chemist Wilhelm Ostwald that the Second Law of Thermodynamics could not be deduced from the First Law of Thermodynamics. "This experience gave me also an opportunity to learn a fact—a remarkable one, in my opinion: A new scientific truth does not triumph by convincing it opponents and making them see the light, but rather because its opponents eventually die, and a new generation grows up that is familiar with it." Planck also wrote of his conflict with Ostwald: "It is one of the most painful experiences of my entire scientific life that I have but seldom—in fact, I might say, never— succeeded in gaining universal recognition for a new result, the truth of which I could demonstrate by a conclusive, albeit only theoretical proof. This is what happened this time, too. All my sound arguments fell on deaf ears. It was simply impossible to be heard against the authority of men like Ostwald, Helm, and Mach."

####Left Brain/Right Brain
Solid science sometimes devolves into pseudoscience, but the imprimatur of being science nevertheless may remain. No better example of this is the popular "left brain/right brain" narrative about the specializations of the cerebral hemispheres. According to this narrative, the left hemisphere is logical, analytic, and linguistic whereas the right is intuitive, creative, and perceptual. Moreover, each of us purportedly relies primarily on one half-brain, making us "left-brain thinkers" or "right-brain thinkers."

####Emotion is Peripheral
The claim that emotion is peripheral can be taken both literally and figuratively. From a literal standpoint, experts have argued about which physiology is necessary for emotional experience since the birth of experimental psychology in the Gilded Age. On the one hand, in his seminal essay "What is an emotion?" William James counterintuitively argued that when we encounter a bear, peripheral (i.e., below the neck) physiological changes occur (e.g., the stomach clenches, heart pounds, and skin sweats) which then generate an experience of emotion (e.g., fear). By implication, peripheral responses must occur before the feeling of fear.

####Common Sense
We fancy ourselves intelligent, conscious and alert, and thinking our way through life. This is an illusion. We are deluded by our brain's generation of a sketchy, rational narrative of subconscious, sometimes irrational or fictitious events that we accept as reality. These narratives are so compelling that they become common sense and we use them to guide our lives. In cases of brain damage, neurologists use the term confabulation to describe a patient's game but flawed attempt to produce an accurate narrative of life events. I suggest we be equally wary of everyday, non-pathological confabulation and retire the common sense hypothesis that we are rational beings in full conscious control of our lives. Indeed, we may be passengers in our body, just going along for the ride, and privy only to second-hand knowledge of our status, course and destination.

####Scientific Inference Via Statistical Rituals





















